Pgp add howto (#613)
ubuntu/ubuntu-project-docs: docs/contributors/setup/set-up-and-manage-pgp-keys.md

(set-up-and-manage-pgp-keys)=
# Set up and manage PGP keys

In this page, we outline how to set up and use PGP keys to fulfil the policies
and goals outlined in {ref}`pgp-key-storage` for usage in the Ubuntu project.

## Outcome

The high level goal is to keep private key material **off disk** and use hardware keys for day-to-day operations.

1. One long-term **primary key** (C), used only to certify subkeys and locked away in a safe place
2. Multiple **signing subkeys** (S) used for signing (one per YubiKey)
3. One **encryption subkey** (E) used for encryption on all YubiKeys

> 3. Subkeys only stored on a YubiKey (smartcard) – not on disk

Reviewer: Two items with number 3

Author: good catch

Author: added to the upcoming PR

```shell
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y gnupg scdaemon pcscd
sudo systemctl enable --now pcscd.socket
```

### GnuPG

[GnuPG](https://gnupg.org/) is an encryption tool that helps manage your {term}`encryption keys <Signing Key>`. You’ll need it later to be able to add a {term}`signature <Signature>` to each {ref}`upload <uploading-to-the-archive>`.

Eventually the {term}`private key <Signing Key>` will represent your identity and therefore must be {ref}`kept safe <pgp-key-storage>` and out of reach of other entities.

It is **best practice** to generate the primary key on an *offline* machine (or at least an offline session) and only use it to create/rotate subkeys. Using a Ubuntu Live image is also a great option as the system is ephemeral and no key will remain on disk once this process is completed.

If that’s too heavy, you can still do this on your main machine, but make sure to clear all keys from your hard drive before you get back online and **treat the backup step as non-negotiable**.

## Step by Step instructions

The following sections will guide you through creating a primary key and
putting the associated subkeys onto hardware keys. After these steps follows

> a section about day 2 {ref}`pgp-key-day-2-operations`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a section about {ref}`pgp-key-day-2-operations`.
```

```

For the further steps in this how-to export the fingerprint into an environment variable (replace with yours):

```
export KEYFPR="YOUR_PRIMARY_KEY_FINGERPRINT"
```

The primary key fingerprint in the previous example is: `C272017B1AC7539AFC0E6DBCAA7EED1BC821DF7D`

```{important}
If \- for now \- you only wanted to create the software key and do not intend to use individual subkeys and hardware keys you may jump to section {ref}`make-your-keys-known` and then be done for now.
```

(pgp-step-2-add-subkeys)=
### Step 2 — Add subkeys

This section shows how to create Signing and Encryption subkeys using the `gpg` tool:

**2.1 Add a signing subkey**

```shell
gpg --expert --edit-key "$KEYFPR"
```

Inside the `gpg>` prompt, add your subkey using:

```none
gpg> addkey
```

- Pick `ECC (sign only)`
- Select curve type: `Curve 25519` (default as of now)
- Set expiration (refer to {ref}`pgp-expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits`)

If you want to set up multiple redundant YubiKeys (allow {ref}`different expiration <pgp-expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits>`, allow individual revocation), add another signing key in the same way.

> **2.2 Add an encryption subkey**

Reviewer: If the user selects "ECC (sign and encrypt" (the default) in the first step, this already adds an encryption subkey. Should we note that this can be skipped?

Author: yes, good catch will do

Author: Ha, on further inspection no - as you see in this paragraph we want users to use the same (create once) encrpytion key while we expect them to have multiple signing (different per yubikey, different expiration) keys.

The doc says that "If you want to set up multiple redundant YubiKeys (allow [different expiration](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/contributors/setup/pgp-key-storage/#pgp-expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits), allow individual revocation), add another signing key in the same way." and this is why they are created individually as one step repeats the other does not.

You can use the same `addkey` command to create an encryption subkey.

- Pick `ECC (encrypt only)`
- Select curve type: `Curve 25519` (current default)
- Set expiration (refer to {ref}`pgp-expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits`)

**2.3 Save and verify subkeys**

```none
gpg> save
```

Then verify – ensure you have `S`, `C` and `E` entries:

```shell
gpg --list-secret-keys --with-subkey-fingerprint --keyid-format=long "$KEYFPR"
```

This output shows something like:

```none
sec   ed25519/AC7EED1BC821DF7D 2026-02-03 [SC] [expires: 2031-02-02]

>       C272027B1AC7538AFC0E6DBCAC7EED1BC821DF7D

Reviewer: The fingerprint changed here compared to step 1, are these from different runs?

Author: yes they are all faked/changed outputs to not publish anyone's data (except if our randomness had a hash conflict with someone out there). We could still fix it to match - thanks for catching it

Author: Fixed in new PR

uid                 [ultimate] Bob Maxwell <bob@maxwell.io>
ssb   rsa4096/AAAAB80DDB143208 2026-02-03 [E] [expires: 2028-02-02]
      A4FB5E3F17B5DBABC652ABCC2223ASSDDB143223
ssb   rsa4096/23BEB80DDB143208 2026-02-03 [S] [expires: 2029-02-02]
      E0FB5E3F17B5DBD7DCAB2AFF23BEB80DDB143208
ssb   rsa4096/AAAAB80DDB143208 2026-02-03 [S] [expires: 2028-02-02]

>       A4FB5E3F17B5DBDAAAAB2AFF23BEB80DDB143219

Reviewer: This lists rsa keys, even though we recommended using ed25519

Author: yep, same answer as below - multiple mocked examples - ack to unify them

Author: Fixed in new PR

```

Which includes:

- A primary key that can be used for signing or certifying the identity of the key chain (SC)
- One subkey for encryption \[E\]
- And two additional subkeys for signing \[S\]

(make-your-keys-known)=
### Step 3 - Make your new key(s) known

If your key is entirely new, or you hereby added additional keys after already uploading the key to the Ubuntu keyserver in the past – you will need to re-upload, otherwise Launchpad will silently reject uploads signed with the (sub)keys.

Use the following command to ensure your public key is uploaded to the Ubuntu keyserver.

```shell

> gpg --keyserver hkps://keyserver.ubuntu.com --send-keys <$KEYFPR>

Reviewer: I think we can drop the angle brackets here

Author: agreed, will do

Author: There have been more of those to fix, I made them all the same style now

```

### Step 4 — Backup

```{important}
Do this before touching the YubiKey!

This is the part that saves you later.
```

Create a dedicated backup directory:

```shell
mkdir -p ~/gpg-backup-$KEYFPR
chmod 700 ~/gpg-backup-$KEYFPR
```

Export your public key:

```shell

> gpg --armor --export "$KEYFPR" > /path/to/your/backup/public-key.asc

Reviewer: If we created the `~/gpg-backup` directory in the step above, should we reuse that path instead of writing `/path/to/your/...`?

Author: vice versa - we should just not create this dir anymore - this is a leftover from a former variant.
Thanks for spotting it!

Author: Don - will be in a new PR that I ping you about

```

Export your secret keys (primary \+ subkeys):

```shell
gpg --armor --export-secret-keys "$KEYFPR" > /path/to/your/backup/secret-key.asc
```

Generate a revocation certificate:

```shell

> gpg --output /path/to/your/backup/revocation.asc --gen-revoke "$KEYFPR"

Reviewer: Do we want to add a recommendation to keep the revocation certificate separate?

Author: separate from what - the other things you put on your "hopefully never needed" storage?

Reviewer: Separate from the key backup. If you lose (either accidentally or through an attack) the offline backup you will also have lost your revocation certificate if I read the guide correctly. In general I think it's fine to have the certificate backed up to multiple (and somewhat less secure) places.

Author: This is an extra file, and just as "hopefully never/rarely used" as the others - I'd not go for a different storage area.

```

> Finally, store these backups **offline** and **encrypted** and remove them from your system.

Reviewer: I think this is a bit underspecified. What process/tool do we recommend for encrypting the backup? Most modern (disk) encryption tools are still not easy to use so offering some concrete steps would be helpful.

Author: nice, you should have been in our discussions I guess. Any time someone tried to make good suggestions in that area it seems you open up pandoras box of philosophy and I-know-it-better, but rarely leading to something generally recommendable.

So you are not wrong, but it is for now as it is intentionally and up to the free choice of the user. And honestly if they have an offline and encrypted storage (whichever) that is already way better than having them readable on disk.

If you insist on having that, what worked in the past when there was no single obviously right choice is providing some examples.

Author: I have some text suggestion for this in a new PR, will ping you when I have all there to open it

name     - Set who you are
url      - Set your key's keyserver url for obtaining public key
           like https://keyserver.ubuntu.com/pks/lookup?op=get&search=0x$KEYFPR
uif 1 on - Require touch action for signing
uif 2 on - Require touch action for encryption/decryption
quit
```

These steps set touch interaction for signing and decryption, to protect against
attackers who may have control of your system so they cannot sign something
without your knowledge.

The default already requires the user pin on first usage after the key
has been plugged in, but only once. `gpg> forcesig` can change that to be
always required if you prefer that (less comfort, more security).

```{important}
To prepare a second YubiKey, repeat {ref}`pgp-step-prepare-the-yubikey` with another YubiKey plugged into the system.
```

### Step 6 – Move subkeys to YubiKey

First, you need to move the signing subkey to the signature slot.
Open the key editor, which will start listing the keys:

```none
gpg --edit-key "$KEYFPR"

Secret key is available.

sec  rsa4096/1234567890ABCDEF
     created: 2015-08-11  expires: never       usage: SC
     trust: unknown       validity: unknown
ssb  rsa4096/DEADBEEFDEADBEEF

>      created: 2015-08-11  expires: never       usage: E

Reviewer: Similar to the above issue, I don't think this encryption key from 2015 belongs here

Author: they are examples from different runs with different setups - but I agree, I should standardize them

Author: Fixed in new PR

(set-up-and-manage-pgp-keys)=
# Set up and manage PGP keys

In this page, we outline how to set up and use PGP keys to fulfil the policies
and goals outlined in {ref}`pgp-key-storage` for usage in the Ubuntu project.

## Outcome

> The high level goal is to keep private key material off disk and use Hardware Keys for day-to-day operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The high level goal is to keep private key material **off disk** and use hardware keys for day-to-day operations.
```

> 1. One long-term primary (C) key (used only to certify subkeys, locked away in a safe place)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. One long-term **primary key** (C), used only to certify subkeys and locked away in a safe place
```

> 2. Multiple signing (S) Subkeys (one per YubiKey)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Multiple **signing subkeys** (S) used for signing (one per YubiKey)
```

> 3. One Subkey used for encryption (E) on all YubiKeys

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. One **encryption subkey** (E) used for encryption on all YubiKeys
```

3. Subkeys only stored on a YubiKey (smartcard) – not on disk
4. A fallback plan in case one YubiKey is lost or expired

> 4. A recovery plan in case of compromised keys

Reviewer 2: It looks like two sections were combined here, but now we have some duplicate entries

Author: it was meant to be two, but it is better to fully fuse them - done

5. Works with Launchpad/Ubuntu uploads, signed git commits and encryption

> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> # Prerequisites

Reviewer 2: Only one h1 header per page please :)

Author: done

## Hardware

You need one YubiKey per subkey. The YubiKey(s) must support OpenPGP.

(gpg-prerequisites-packages)=
## Packages

Install the following packages:

```shell
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y gnupg scdaemon pcscd
sudo systemctl enable --now pcscd.socket
```

## GnuPG

> [GnuPG](https://gnupg.org/) is an encryption tool that helps manage your [encryption keys](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/how-ubuntu-is-made/concepts/glossary/#term-Signing-Key). You’ll need it later to be able to add a [signature](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/how-ubuntu-is-made/concepts/glossary/#term-Signature) to each [upload](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/contributors/uploading/#uploading-to-the-archive).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[GnuPG](https://gnupg.org/) is an encryption tool that helps manage your {term}`encryption keys <Signing-Key>`. You’ll need it later to be able to add a {term}`signature <Signature>` to each {ref}`upload <uploading-to-the-archive>`.
```

> Eventually the [private key](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/how-ubuntu-is-made/concepts/glossary/#term-Signing-Key) will represent your identity and therefore has to be [kept safe](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/contributors/setup/pgp-key-storage/#pgp-key-storage) and out of reach of other entities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Eventually the {term}`private key <Signing-Key>` will represent your identity and therefore must be {ref}`kept safe <pgp-key-storage>` and out of reach of other entities.
```

It is **best practice** to generate the primary key on an *offline* machine (or at least an offline session) and only use it to create/rotate subkeys. Using a Ubuntu Live image is also a great option as the system is ephemeral and no key will remain on disk once this process is completed.

If that’s too heavy, you can still do this on your main machine, but make sure to clear all keys from your hard drive before you get back online and **treat the backup step as non-negotiable**.

> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> # Step by Step instructions

Reviewer 2: This should also not be a h1 header

Author: done

```shell
gpg --expert --full-generate-key
```

Pick your key type:

* Type: (9) ECC (sign and encrypt) (or RSA 4096 if you have strict compatibility needs)
* For ECC: Curve 25519 is a common modern choice

Now you must:

* Set an expiration (e.g., 1–2 years) — you can extend this later
* Set a passphrase to protect your primary key

List your keys:

```none
>gpg --list-secret-keys --keyid-format=long
gpg: checking the trustdb
gpg: marginals needed: 3  completes needed: 1  trust model: pgp
gpg: depth: 0  valid:   1  signed:   0  trust: 0-, 0q, 0n, 0m, 0f, 1u
gpg: next trustdb check due at 2031-02-02
------------------------
sec   ed25519/AC7EED1BC821DF7D 2026-02-03 [SC] [expires: 2031-02-02]
      C272017B1AC7539AFC0E6DBCAA7EED1BC821DF7D
uid                 [ultimate] Bob Maxwell <bob@maxwell.io>
ssb   cv25519/3BDA8E9DAD49689C 2026-02-03 [E] [expires: 2031-02-02]
```

For the further steps in this how-to export the fingerprint into an environment variable (replace with yours):

```
export KEYFPR="YOUR_PRIMARY_KEY_FINGERPRINT"
```

The primary key fingerprint in the previous example is: `C272017B1AC7539AFC0E6DBCAA7EED1BC821DF7D`

```{important}

> If \- for now \- you only wanted to create the software key and do not intend to go for individual subkeys and the usage of hardware keys you may jump to section {ref}`make-your-keys-known` and then be done for now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If \- for now \- you only wanted to create the software key and do not intend to use individual subkeys and hardware keys you may jump to section {ref}`make-your-keys-known` and then be done for now.
```

```

> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

(pgp-step-2-add-subkeys)=
## Step 2 — Add subkeys

This section shows how to create Signing and Encryption subkeys:

```shell
gpg --expert --edit-key "$KEYFPR"
```

Inside the `gpg>` prompt, add your subkey using:

> **2.1 Add a signing subkey**

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what the purpose of this line is? is it not a duplicate of the previous?

Author: I've moved the header above the content instead of in between, makes more sense now

```none
gpg> addkey
```

- Pick `ECC (sign only)`
- Select curve type: `Curve 25519` (default as of now)

> - Set expiration (refer to [https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/contributors/setup/pgp-key-storage/\#pgp-expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/contributors/setup/pgp-key-storage/#pgp-expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Set expiration (refer to {ref}`pgp-expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits`)
```

> If you want to set up multiple redundant YubiKeys (allow [different expiration](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/contributors/setup/pgp-key-storage/#expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits), allow individual revocation), add another signing key in the same way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to set up multiple redundant YubiKeys (allow {ref}`different expiration <expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits>`, allow individual revocation), add another signing key in the same way.
```

**2.2 Add an encryption subkey**

You can use the same `addkey` command to create an encryption subkey.

- Pick `ECC (encrypt only)`
- Select curve type: `Curve 25519` (current default)

> - Set expiration (refer to [https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/contributors/setup/pgp-key-storage/\#pgp-expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/contributors/setup/pgp-key-storage/#pgp-expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Set expiration (refer to {ref}`pgp-expiration-dates-and-regular-key-audits`)
```

**2.3 Save and verify subkeys**

```none
gpg> save
```

Then verify – ensure you have `S`, `C` and `E` entries:

```shell
gpg --list-secret-keys --with-subkey-fingerprint --keyid-format=long "$KEYFPR"
```

This output shows something like:

```none
sec   ed25519/AC7EED1BC821DF7D 2026-02-03 [SC] [expires: 2031-02-02]
      C272027B1AC7538AFC0E6DBCAC7EED1BC821DF7D
uid                 [ultimate] Bob Maxwell <bob@maxwell.io>
ssb   rsa4096/AAAAB80DDB143208 2026-02-03 [E] [expires: 2028-02-02]
      A4FB5E3F17B5DBABC652ABCC2223ASSDDB143223
ssb   rsa4096/23BEB80DDB143208 2026-02-03 [S] [expires: 2029-02-02]
      E0FB5E3F17B5DBD7DCAB2AFF23BEB80DDB143208
ssb   rsa4096/AAAAB80DDB143208 2026-02-03 [S] [expires: 2028-02-02]
      A4FB5E3F17B5DBDAAAAB2AFF23BEB80DDB143219
```

Which includes:

- A primary key that can be used for signing or certifying the identity of the key chain (SC)
- One subkey for encryption \[E\]

> - And two additionally subkeys for signing \[S\]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- And two additional subkeys for signing \[S\]
```

(make-your-keys-known)=
## Step 3 - Make your new key(s) known

If your key is entirely new, or you hereby added additional keys after already uploading the key to the Ubuntu keyserver in the past – you will need to re-upload, otherwise Launchpad will silently reject uploads signed with the (sub)keys.

Use the following command to ensure your public key is uploaded to the Ubuntu keyserver.

```shell
gpg --keyserver hkps://keyserver.ubuntu.com --send-keys <$KEYFPR>
```

> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

## Step 4 — Backup

```{important}
Do this before touching the YubiKey!

This is the part that saves you later.
```

Create a dedicated backup directory:

```shell
mkdir -p ~/gpg-backup-$KEYFPR
chmod 700 ~/gpg-backup-$KEYFPR
```

Export your public key:

```shell
gpg --armor --export "$KEYFPR" > /path/to/your/backup/public-key.asc
```

Export your secret keys (primary \+ subkeys):

```shell
gpg --armor --export-secret-keys "$KEYFPR" > /path/to/your/backup/secret-key.asc
```

Generate a revocation certificate:

```shell
gpg --output /path/to/your/backup/revocation.asc --gen-revoke "$KEYFPR"
```

Finally, store these backups **offline** and **encrypted** and remove them from your system.

> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> (step-4-prepare-the-yubikey)=

Reviewer 2: numbers don't match

Author: made the reference to not hold the number at all (less noise in case of future changes).

General key info..: [none]
```

If the output says “No such device”, try restarting `gpg-agent`:

```shell
gpgconf --kill gpg-agent
```

Set OpenPGP user info (name/login/url) via:

```shell
gpg --edit-card
```

In the  `gpg\>` prompt you should use the following commands in this order:

```none
admin    - Toggle the usability of privileged commands in this session
passwd   - Set your own admin pin (defaults to 12345678)
passwd   - Set your own standard pin (defaults to 123456)
name     - Set who you are
url      - Set your key's keyserver url for obtaining public key
           like https://keyserver.ubuntu.com/pks/lookup?op=get&search=0x$KEYFPR
uif 1 on - Require touch action for signing
uif 2 on - Require touch action for encryption/decryption
quit
```

These steps set touch interaction for signing and decryption, to protect against
attackers who may have control of your system so they cannot sign something
without your knowledge.

The default already requires the user pin on first usage after the key
has been plugged in, but only once. `gpg> forcesig` can change that to be
always required if you prefer that (less comfort, more security).

```{important}

> To prepare a second YubiKey, repeat {ref}`step-4-prepare-the-yubikey` with another YubiKey plugged into the system.

Reviewer 2: this should be step 5

Author: as above, this ref is now `pgp-step-prepare-the-yubikey` without a number

```

> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

starting from 0\. To pick the first listed signing key in this example:

```none
gpg> key 2
```

This toggles the selection of subkeys – the selected ones will now show a `*`.

If needed do further (un)select actions with the “key” command to match your needs,
this guide assumes you selected one signing subkey, then:

```none
gpg> keytocard
```

Choose the slot:

* **Signature**

You will be asked for the passphrase of your primary key as well as the admin pin of the hardware key.

Since we want the signing key to only be present on the hardware, issue `save` which **will remove it from the local keyring**.

```none
gpg> save
```

Listing your secret keys will now show that it has been moved to the card represented by `>` after the subkey.

```none
gpg --list-secret-keys --with-subkey-fingerprint
...
ssb>  ed25519 2026-05-14 [S] [expires: 2028-05-13]
      DEADBEEFDEADBEEFDEADBEEFDEADBEEFDEADBEEFDEADBEEF
      Card serial no. = 0006 12345678
```

Next, move the encryption subkey to the encryption slot.

Start over with `gpg --edit-key` again, select the encryption subkey (e.g., key 1),
then chose the Encryption slot.

```{important}

> After moving, you will bgain e prompted to save changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After moving, you will be prompted again to save changes.
```

**DO NOT SAVE**, since this will delete the encryption key stored in your computer.
We want to keep the encryption key around to use the same one on every hardware key.
```

```none
$ gpg --edit-key "$KEYFPR"
gpg> key 1
# Make sure the key with "usage: E" is selected
gpg> keytocard
# Choose slot Encryption key
gpg> 2
# Leave the tool
gpg> quit
# It should look like this:
# Save changes? (y/N) n
# Quit without saving? (y/N) y
```

```{important}
To handle a second hardware key, run through the steps in this section again with the other hardware key plugged into your system.

> At the step of transferring the signing key (Where you selected the first subkey when doing the first iteration of the steps), please select the second signing subkey this time. Combined with the different expiration dates that ensures that they will not both expire at the very same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the step of transferring the signing key (Where you selected the first subkey when doing the first iteration of the steps), please select the second signing subkey this time. Combined with the different expiration dates, this ensures they will not both expire at the same time.
```

```shell
gpg --delete-secret-keys "$KEYFPR"
```

List your secret keys again to verify they are all known, but not present on the system anymore.

The following output shows:

- The primary key with `#` as (`sec#)` which marks it as offline and not usable.
- Subkeys marked with `>` like (`ssb>)` which marks them as being stored on a smartcard.

```none
$ gpg --list-secret-keys --with-subkey-fingerprint
/home/youruser/.gnupg/pubring.kbx
---------------------------------------------------------
sec#  rsa4096 2015-08-11 [SC]
      1234567890ABCDEF1234567890ABCDEF123456
uid           [ unknown] Foo Bar <foo.bar@company.com>
uid           [ unknown] Some One <some.1@gmail.com>
ssb>  rsa4096 2015-08-11 [E]
      DEADBEEFDEADBEEFDEADBEEFDEADBEEFDEADBE
      Card serial no. = 0006 12345678
ssb>  ed25519 2026-05-14 [S] [expires: 2028-05-13]
      CAFEBABECAFEBABECAFEBABECAFEBABECAFEBA
      Card serial no. = 0006 12345678
ssb>  ed25519 2026-05-14 [S] [expires: 2027-08-07]
      FAFABABAB0B0B0B0FAFABABAB0B0B0B0FAFABA
      Card serial no. = 0006 12345678
```

## Step 8 — Git commit signing

First, you need to configure Git. To enable signing git commits, set the `commit.gpgsign` option.

> Either  per repository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Either per repository:
```

```shell
git config commit.gpgsign true
```

> Or globally

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Or globally:
```

```shell
git config --global commit.gpgsign true
```

If you have more than one primary key with the same UID (username and mail), you can specify which key to use for signing.

```shell
git config --global user.signingkey $KEYFPR
```

If you want to sign a single commit:

```shell
git commit -S
```

Test commit signing:

```shell
cd $(mktemp -d)
git init
git commit -S -m "test signed commit" --allow-empty
git log -1 --show-signature
```

You should see: **Good signature**.

Finally, verification.

Do not forget to upload your public key in the different Git servers hosting your work. This shows how you can do it for GitHub:

```shell
gpg --armor --export "$KEYFPR"
```

Copy/paste into GitHub → Settings → SSH and GPG keys.

> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Author: GH missed that I did that

## Step 9 — Launchpad and Ubuntu upload signing

Ensure Launchpad knows about your public key to associate your username, and thereby its permissions, with your signed uploads: [https://launchpad.net/\~](https://launchpad.net/~)\<your-launchpad-username\>/+editpgpkeys.

After building a package, you can sign the `.changes` file using `debsign.`

```shell
debsign <filename>_source.changes
```

It will determine the signature needed from the email in the changelog stanza.
If this does not work out of the box, you might need to explicitly configure your signing key by exporting the `DEBSIGN_KEYID=$KEYFPR.`

> You can try uploading a package to a PPA [as described in the project documentation](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/project/contributors/bug-fix/build-packages-in-a-ppa/#upload-the-source-package) using the key associated with your Launchpad account.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can try uploading a package to a PPA {ref}`as described in the project documentation <upload-the-source-package>` using the key associated with your Launchpad account.
```

Author: GH missed that I did that

---

(pgp-key-day-2-operations)=

> # Day 2 operations

Reviewer 2: This h1 header also needs to be demoted

Author: done

This section covers some critical operations that you might need to look into
some time later, some of which require the use of your backup of these keys.

## Let another system use the same keys

You received your new computer and want to import your key.

There is no need to copy private keys, they move with the hardware keys now plugged in here.

First install the {ref}`packages mentioned in the prerequisites <gpg-prerequisites-packages>`.

> Then Plug in YubiKey and check if it is detected

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then plug in the YubiKey and check if it is detected:
```

Author: GH missed that I did that

```shell
gpg --card-status
```

> This should be the same as you have seen it when setting up the hardware key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This should be the same as what you saw when setting up the hardware key.
```

Author: GH missed that I did that (if you wonder, the UI accept suggestions crashed)

You can import your key automatically using the URL you set on your YubiKey at setup time.
Or get it from the keyserver directly by specifying which key you need.

Import via the YubiKey's stored URL:
```shell
gpg --edit-card
gpg> fetch
```

It should show:

```none
# gpg: requesting key from 'https://keyserver.ubuntu.com/pks/lookup?op=get&search=0x$YOURKEY'
# gpg: key DEADBEEFDEADBEEF: public key "Your Name <yourname@example.com>" imported
# gpg: Total number processed: 1
# gpg:               imported: 1
```

> Otherwise import the .asc public key you backed up, and run

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Otherwise import the `.asc` public key you backed up, and run:
```

Author: GH missed that I did that (if you wonder, the UI accept suggestions crashed)

```shell
gpg --import /path/to/your/backup/public-key.asc
```

> Verify that your keys have been imported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Verify that your keys have been imported:
```

Author: GH missed that I did that (if you wonder, the UI accept suggestions crashed)

```shell
gpg --list-keys
```

> Trust yourself (well, your key)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Trust yourself (well, your key):
```

Author: GH missed that I did that (if you wonder, the UI accept suggestions crashed)

```none
gpg --edit-key $KEYFPR
gpg> trust
# 5 = I trust ultimately
gpg> 5
# Do you really want to set this key to ultimate trust? (y/N)
gpg> y
gpg> quit
```

To confirm keys are loaded and working correctly try signing with them:

```shell
echo "Ubuntu is awesome" | gpg --clearsign
```

> ## Updating Expiration Dates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Updating expiration dates
```

Author: GH missed that I did that (if you wonder, the UI accept suggestions crashed)

export KEYFPR="YOUR_PRIMARY_KEY_FINGERPRINT"

# Import the key
gpg --import /path/to/your/backup/secret-key.asc
gpg --edit-key "$KEYFPR"
```

This lists the keys:

```none
Secret key is available.

sec  rsa4096/1234567890ABCDEF
     created: 2015-08-11  expires: never       usage: SC
     trust: unknown       validity: unknown
ssb  rsa4096/DEADBEEFDEADBEEF
     created: 2015-08-11  expires: never       usage: E
ssb  ed25519/CAFEBABECAFEBABE
     created: 2026-05-14  expires: 2028-05-13  usage: S
ssb  ed25519/FAFABABAB0B0B0B0
     created: 2026-05-14  expires: 2027-08-07  usage: S
[ unknown] (1). Foo Bar <foo.bar@company.com>
[ unknown] (2)  Some One <some.1@gmail.com>
```

In the `gpg>` prompts then:

```none
# 1. Extend the primary key if needed (default selected)
gpg> expire
# enter duration (e.g. 1y)
1y
# Repeat to update expiration for other subkeys (key 2, key 3, etc.)
gpg> key 2
gpg> expire
1y
# after updating all keys, save and exit
gpg> save
```

Since we are operating under a temporary `GNUPGHOME`, don't forget to export
the updated public key as your new backup.

```shell
gpg --armor --export "$KEYFPR" > /path/to/your/backup/public-key.asc
```

> Now we can safely delete the temporary GNUPGHOME and import the updated public key to the real local keychain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we can safely delete the temporary `GNUPGHOME` and import the updated public key to the real local keychain.
```

Author: GH missed that I did that (if you wonder, the UI accept suggestions crashed)

```shell
rm -rf "$GNUPGHOME"
unset GNUPGHOME
gpg --import /path/to/your/backup/public-key.asc
```

Then, upload the updated key to the keyserver as shown in {ref}`make-your-keys-known`.

> ## Subkeys Compromised

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## If a subkey is compromised
```

Author: GH missed that I did that (if you wonder, the UI accept suggestions crashed)

If you followed this guide, then your keys should be safely locked away and backed up, and if only a subkey is compromised, we can use the primary key to generate new subkeys.

Do this the instant you are able\! The longer you wait, the longer anyone with access to your compromised key can sign things on your behalf\!

Import the backup keys as documented in the previous section.
List the imported keys and extract the primary key fingerprint:

```shell
gpg --list-secret-keys
export KEYFPR="YOUR_PRIMARY_KEY_FINGERPRINT"
```

> Now: Edit, select and revoke the compromised/lost subkeys

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now edit, select and revoke the compromised/lost subkeys:
```

Author: GH missed that I did that (if you wonder, the UI accept suggestions crashed)

```shell
gpg --edit-key $KEYFPR
```

> Then select the subkey (by index) and revoke it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then select the subkey (by index) and revoke it:
```

Author: GH missed that I did that (if you wonder, the UI accept suggestions crashed)

```none
gpg> key $SUBKEY_INDEX
gpg> revkey
```

```{important}
Warning - this is an irreversible action\!

> ```

Reviewer 2: This warning should come before the commands are presented

Author: ok, moved up

Save your changes and *immediately* upload to any keyserver(s) to which you previously used your key following the steps of {ref}`make-your-keys-known`.

> After doing that repeat {ref}`pgp-step-2-add-subkeys` to {ref}`step-7-remove-your-keys-from-the-system` to create new subkeys to replace the revoked ones on your hardware keys.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After doing that repeat steps {ref}`pgp-step-2-add-subkeys` to {ref}`step-7-remove-your-keys-from-the-system`, to create new subkeys to replace the revoked ones on your hardware keys.
```

Author: GH missed that I did that (if you wonder, the UI accept suggestions crashed)

> ## Primary Key Compromised

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## If the primary key is compromised
```

Author: GH missed that I did that (if you wonder, the UI accept suggestions crashed)
